---
id: 5576
title: Twitter
date: '2020-02-06T12:29:44-04:00'
author: admin
layout: post
guid: 'https://www.nuggetofjoy.com/?p=5576'
permalink: /twitter/
category_sticky_post:
    - '0'
classic-editor-remember:
    - block-editor

categories:
    - 'Interactive and Social Media'
    - Projects

tag:
    - social
---
**Twitter** (/ˈtwɪtər/) is an online news and social networking service where users post and interact with messages, “tweets”, restricted to 140 characters. Registered users can post tweets, but those who are unregistered can only read them.

Please complete the following before the next class.

1. Follow all our classmates on twitter.
2. Make **Ten** tweets on your page.
3. **Incorporate images** in your individual tweets. Only one image can be used per post. Be creative.
4. Please use video for at least three tweets. **Use discretion.** Make sure you follow the rules set forth in the student handbook and the syllabus.
5. Privacy settings will be reviewed in class.

**Class Assignment:** Using your Creative Brief and your Social Media assets come up with a marketing strategy for Twitter. The campaign should be viral, have a goal, and include a variety of media for twitter. You should include links in your tweets to help support your campaign. What are you selling? What are your services? Let us know. Add incentives to your project. Make your fans hunt and follow your posts and hidden content.

[HubSpot Blog: Twitter for Business](https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/twitter-for-business)

---

**Homework:** After you have completed ALL the assigned work above please do the following:

Comment to three posts from each of your classmates. One should include video, one should be purely text based, the other image based. Be positive!

Have a solid marketing plan ready to implement during next class. Consider it a narrative that takes us on a journey that brings us closer to your brand. Use incentives. Be creative!
